The Project Gutenberg EBook of Einstein's Theories of Relativity and
Gravitation, by J. Malcolm Bird

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Einstein's Theories of Relativity and Gravitation

Author: J. Malcolm Bird

Release Date: October 4, 2020 [EBook #63372]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EINSTEIN'S THEORIES--RELATIVITY, GRAVITATION ***




Produced by Jeroen Hellingman and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net/ for Project
Gutenberg (This book was produced from scanned images of
public domain material from the Google Books project.)









           EINSTEIN'S THEORIES OF RELATIVITY AND GRAVITATION

                A SELECTION OF MATERIAL FROM THE ESSAYS
                      SUBMITTED IN THE COMPETITION
                 FOR THE EUGENE HIGGINS PRIZE OF $5,000


                          COMPILED AND EDITED,
                    AND INTRODUCTORY MATTER SUPPLIED
                                   BY
                            J. MALCOLM BIRD,
                 Associate Editor, Scientific American


                                NEW YORK
                  SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN PUBLISHING CO.,
                               MUNN & CO.
                                  1921









PREFACE


The obstacles which the layman finds to understanding Einstein's
relativity theories lie not so much in the inherent difficulty of
these theories themselves as in the difficulty of preparing the
mind for their reception. The theory is no more difficult than any
scientific development of comparable depth; it is not so difficult as
some of these. But it is a fact that for a decent understanding of it,
a large background of scientific knowledge and scientific habit of
thought is essential. The bulk of the writers who have attempted to
explain Einstein to the general reader have not realized the great gulf
which lies between the mental processes of the trained mathematician
and those of the man in the street. They have not perceived that
the lay reader must be personally conducted for a long distance from
the vestibule of the temple of science before he comes to Einstein,
and that he cannot by any possibility make this journey unaided. The
result has been to pitchfork the reader into the intricacies of the
subject without adequate preparation.

The present volume avoids this mistake with the utmost care. It avoids
it, in fact, with such deliberation as to make it in order to say a
word in explanation of what will at first glance seem an extraordinary
arrangement of material. It was to be expected, doubtless, that this
book would open with a brief statement of the genesis and the outcome
of the Einstein Prize Essay Contest for the $5,000 prize offered by
Mr. Eugene Higgins. It was doubtless to be expected that, after this
had been dismissed, the winning essay would be given the post of honor
in advance of all other material bearing actually on the Einstein
theories. When the reader observes that this has not been done, he
will by all means expect a word of explanation; and it is mainly for
the purpose of giving this that we make these introductory remarks.

The essays submitted in the contest, and in particular the comments of
a few disappointed readers upon Mr. Bolton's prize essay, make quite
plain what might have been anticipated--that in the small compass
of 3,000 words it is not possible both to prepare the reader's mind
for a discussion of Relativity and to give a discussion that shall be
adequate. Mr. Bolton himself, in replying to a protest that he had not
done all this, has used the word "miracle"--we think it a well-advised
one. No miracle was expected as a result of the contest, and none has
been achieved. But in awarding the prize, the Judges had to decide
whether it was the best preliminary exposition or the best discussion
that was wanted. They decided, and rightly we believe, that the award
should go to an actual statement of what the Einstein theories are
and what they do, rather than to a mere introduction, however well
conceived and well executed the latter might be. Nevertheless,
we should be closing our eyes to a very obvious fact if we did
not recognize that, without something in the way of preparation,
the general reader is not going to pursue Mr. Bolton's essay, or
any other essay on this subject, with profit. It is in order the
more forcefully to hold out inducements to him to subject himself to
this preparation that we place at the head of the book the chapters
designed to give it to him.

Chapter II. is intended so to bring the mind of the reader into contact
with certain philosophical problems presented to us by our experiences
with the external world and our efforts to learn the facts about it,
that he may approach the subject of relativity with an appreciation
of the place it occupies as a phase of human thought and a pillar of
the scientific structure. Until the reader is aware of the existence
of these problems and the directions taken by the efforts, successful
and unsuccessful, to unravel them, he is not equipped to comprehend
the doctrine of relativity at all; he is in much the same case as a
child whose education had reached only the primer stage, if asked to
read the masterpieces of literature. He lacks not alone the vocabulary,
but equally the mental background on which the vocabulary is based.

It will be noted that in this and the chapters immediately following
it, the Editor has supplied material freely. The obvious interpretation
is that satisfactory material covering the desired ground was not
found in any of the essays; for we are sure the scope and number
of the credited excerpts will make it clear that all contributions
were adequately scrutinized in search of available passages. This
"inadequacy" of the competing essays has been severely commented
upon by several correspondents, and the inference drawn that as
a whole the offerings were not up to the mark. Such a viewpoint
is wholly unjust to the contestants. The essays which paid serious
attention to the business of paving the way to relativity necessarily
did so at the expense of completeness in the later paragraphs where
specific explanation of the Einstein theories was in order. Mr. Law,
whose essay was by all means the best of those that gave much space
to introductory remarks, found himself left with only 600 words
in which to tell what it was that he had been introducing. The
majority of the contestants appear to have faced the same question
as to subject matter which the Judges faced, and to have reached
the same decision. They accordingly devoted their attention toward
the prize, rather than toward the production of an essay that would
best supplement that of the winner. It is for this very reason that,
in these preliminary chapters, so large a proportion of the material
has had to be supplied by the Editor; and this very circumstance is
a tribute to the good judgment of the competitors, rather than ground
for criticism of their work.

The general introduction of Chapter II. out of the way, Chapters
III. and IV. take up the business of leading the reader into the
actual subject of relativity. The subject is here developed in what
may be called the historical order--the order in which it took form in
Einstein's own mind. Both in and outside the contest of which this book
is the outcome, a majority of those who have written on relativity
have followed this order, which is indeed a very natural one and
one well calculated to give to the rather surprising assumptions of
relativity a reasonableness which they might well appear to the lay
mind to lack if laid down more arbitrarily. In these two chapters
no effort is made to carry the argument beyond the formulation of
the Special Principle of the relativity of uniform motion, but this
principle is developed in considerably more detail than would be the
case if it were left entirely to the competing essayists. The reason
for this is again that we are dealing with a phase of the subject
which is of subordinate importance so far as a complete statement of
the General Theory of Relativity is concerned, but which is of the
greatest significance in connection with the effort of the layman to
acquire the proper preliminary orientation toward the larger subject.

Chapter V. goes back again to general ground. Among the ideas which
the competing essayists were forced to introduce into their text on a
liberal scale is that of non-Euclidean geometry. The entire formulation
of the General Theory of Relativity is in fact an exercise in this. The
essayists--good, bad and indifferent alike--were quite unanimous in
their decision that this was one thing which the reader would have
to assume the responsibility of acquiring for himself. Certainly they
were justified in this; for the Editor has been able to explain what
non-Euclidean geometry is only by using up considerably more space
than the contestants had for an entire essay. No effort has been made
to set forth any of the details of any of the various non-Euclidean
geometries; it has simply been the aim to draw the dividing line
between Euclidean and non-Euclidean, and to make the existence of
the latter appear reasonable, so that when the essayists come to talk
about it the reader will not feel hopelessly at sea. In other words,
this is another case of providing the mental background, but on such
a scale that it has seemed necessary to give a separate chapter to it.

Chapter VI. completes the preliminary course in the fundamentals of
relativity by tying up together the findings of Chapter V. and those
of Chapters III. and IV. It represents more or less of a last-minute
change of plan; for while it had been the Editor's intent from the
beginning to place the material of Chapters II.-V. in its present
position, his preliminary impression would have been that the work
of the present Chapter VI. would be adequately done by the essayists
themselves. His reading of the essays, however, convinced him that it
had not so been done--that with the possible exception of Mr. Francis,
the essayists did not make either a serious or a successful effort to
show the organic connection between the Special Theory of Relativity
and the Minkowski space-time structure, or the utter futility of
trying to reconcile ourselves to the results of the former without
employing the ideas of the latter. So Chapter VI. was supplied to make
good this deficiency, and to complete the mental equipment which the
reader requires for his battle with the General Theory.

In laying down a set of general principles to govern the award of
the prize, one of the first things considered by the Judges was the
relative importance of the Special and the General Theories. It was
their opinion that no essay could possibly qualify for the prize which
did not very distinctly give to the General Theory the center of the
stage; and that in fact discussion of the Special Theory was pertinent
only so long as it contributed, in proportion to the space assigned
it, to the attack upon the main subject. The same principle has been
employed in selecting essays for complete or substantially complete
reproduction in this volume. Writers who dealt with the Special Theory
in any other sense than as a preliminary step toward the General Theory
have been relegated to the introductory chapters, where such excerpts
from their work have been used as were found usable. The distinction
of publication under name and title is reserved for those who wrote
consistently and specifically upon the larger subject--with the one
exception of Dr. Russell, whose exposition of the Special Theory is so
far the best of those submitted and at the same time so distinctive
that we have concluded it will appear to better advantage by itself
than as a part of Chapters III. and IV.

Following after Mr. Bolton's essay we have tried to arrange the various
contributions, not at all in any order of merit, but in the order
that will make connected reading of the book most nearly possible
and profitable. Each essay should be made easier of reading by the
examination of those preceding it; at the same time each, by the choice
of ground covered and by the emphasis on points not brought out sharply
by its predecessors, should throw new light upon these predecessors.

The reader will find that no two of the essays given thus in full
duplicate or even come close to duplicating one another. They have
of course been selected with this in view; each represents the best
of several essays of substantially the same character. Not all of
them require comment here, but concerning some of them a word may
well be said.

Mr. Francis, we believe, has succeeded in packing more substance
into his 3,000 words than any other competitor. Mr. Elliot has come
closer than anybody else to really explaining relativity in terms
familiar to everybody, without asking the reader to enlarge his
vocabulary and with a minimum demand so far as enlarging his mental
outlook is concerned. Were it not for certain conspicuous defects,
his essay would probably have taken the prize. In justice to the
Judges, we should state that we have taken the liberty of eliminating
Mr. Elliot's concluding paragraph, which was the most objectionable
feature of his essay.

Dr. Dushman chose for his title the one which we adopted for this
book. It became necessary, therefore, for us to find a new title for
his essay; aside from this instance, the main titles appearing at the
heads of the various complete essays are those of the authors. The
subtitles have in practically every instance been supplied editorially.

Dr. Pickering submitted two essays, one written from the viewpoint
of the physicist, the other from that of the astronomer. To make
each complete, he naturally found it necessary to duplicate between
them certain introductory and general material. We have run the two
essays together into a single narrative, with the elimination of this
duplicated material; aside from this blue-penciling no alteration
has been made in Dr. Pickering's text. This text however served as
the basis of blue-penciling that of several other contestants, as
indicated in the foot notes.

For the reader who is qualified or who can qualify to understand it,
Dr. Murnaghan's essay is perhaps the most illuminating of all. Even
the reader who does not understand it all will realize that its author
brings to the subject a freshness of viewpoint and an originality of
treatment which are rather lacking in some of the published essays,
and which it will readily be understood were conspicuously lacking
in a good many of the unpublished ones. Dr. Murnaghan of all the
competitors has come closest to making a contribution to science as
well as to the semi-popular literature of science.

In the composite chapters, the brackets followed by reference numbers
have been used as the most practicable means of identifying the
various individual contributions. We believe that this part of the
text can be read without allowing the frequent occurrence of these
symbols to distract the eye. As to the references themselves, the
asterisk marks the contributions of the Editor. The numbers are those
attached to the essays in order of and at the time of their receipt;
it has been more convenient to use these than to assign consecutive
numbers to the quoted essays. The several numbers identify passages
from the essays of the following contestants:


 10:   Frederick W. Shurlock, Derby, England.
 18:   L. L. Whyte, Cambridge, England.
 24:   Prof. Moritz Schlick, University of Rostock, Germany.
 30:   C. E. Rose, M.E., Little Rock, Ark.
 33:   H. Gartelmann, Bremen, Germany.
 35:   Prof. Joseph S. Ames, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore.
 47:   James O. G. Gibbons, East Orange. N. J.
 82:   Charles H. Burr, Philadelphia.
101:   L. F. H. de Miffonis. B.A., C.E., Ottawa, Canada.
102:   Charles A. Brunn, Kansas City.
106:   J. Elias Fries, Fellow A.I.E.E., Birmingham, Ala.
114:   Dean W. P. Graham, Syracuse University, Syracuse, N. Y.
115:   Rev. George Thomas Manley, London.
116:   Prof. J. A. Schouten, Delft, Netherlands.
121:   Elwyn F. Burrill, Berkeley, Cal.
125:   Dorothy Burr, Bryn Mawr, Pa.
130:   C. W. Kanolt, Bureau of Standards, Washington.
135:   Robert Stevenson, New York.
139:   Leopold Schorsch, New York.
141:   Dr. M. C. Mott-Smith, Los Angeles, Calif.
147:   Edward A. Clarke, Columbus, O.
149:   Edward A. Partridge, Philadelphia.
150:   Col. John Millis, U. S. A., Chicago.
152:   George F. Marsteller, Detroit.
156:   D. B. Hall, Cincinnati.
165:   Francis Farquhar, York, Pa.
178:   Dr. George de Bothezat, Dayton, O.
179:   Professor A. E. Caswell, University of Oregon, Eugene, Ore.
182:   C. E. Dimick, New London, Conn.
186:   Earl R. Evans, Washington, D. C.
188:   Norman E. Gilbert, Dartmouth College, Hanover, N. H.
192:   A. d'Abro. New York.
194:   L. M. Alexander, Cincinnati.
197:   Kenneth W. Reed, East Cleveland, O.
198:   Prof. E. N. da C. Andrade, Ordnance College, Woolwich, England.
216:   Professor Andrew H. Patterson, University of North Carolina,
       Chapel Hill, N. C.
220:   Prof. Arthur Gordon Webster, Clark College, Worcester, Mass.
221:   Walter van B. Roberts, Princeton University, N. J.
223:   Paul M. Batchelder, Austin, Tex.
227:   Prof. R. W. Wood, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore.
229:   E. P. Fairbairn, M.C., B.Sc., Glasgow.
231:   R. F. Deimel, Hoboken, N. J.
232:   Lieut. W. Mark Angus, U. S. N., Philadelphia.
235:   Edward Adams Richardson, Kansas City.
263:   Prof. William Benjamin Smith, Tulane University, New Orleans.
264:   James Rice, University of London, London.
267:   William Hemmenway Pratt, Lynn, Mass.
272:   R. Bruce Lindsay, New Bedford, Mass.
283:   Frank E. Law, Montclair, N. J.


In addition to the specific credit given by these references for
specifically quoted passages, the Editor feels that he ought to
acknowledge his general indebtedness to the competing essayists,
collectively, for the many ideas which he has taken away from their
text to clothe in his own words. This does not mean that the Editor has
undertaken generally to improve upon the language of the competitors,
but merely that the reading of all their essays has given him many
ideas of such complex origin that he could not assign credit if
he would.









TABLE OF CONTENTS


I.--The Einstein $5,000 Prize: How the Contest Came to be Held,
and Some of the Details of Its Conduct. By the Editor      1

II.--The World--And Us: An Introductory Discussion of the Philosophy
of Relativity, and of the Mechanism of our Contact with Time and
Space. By various contributors and the Editor      19

III.--The Relativity of Uniform Motion: Classical Ideas on the
Subject; the Ether and the Apparent Possibility of Absolute Motion;
the Michelson-Morley Experiment and the Final Negation of this
possibility. By various contributors and the Editor      47

IV.--The Special Theory of Relativity: What Einstein's Study of
Uniform Motion Tells Us About Time and Space and the Nature of the
External Reality. By various contributors and the Editor      76

V.--That Parallel Postulate: Modern Geometric Methods; the Dividing
Line Between Euclidean and Non-Euclidean; and the Significance of
the Latter. By the Editor      111

VI.--The Space-Time Continuum: Minkowski's World of Events, and the
Way in Which It Fits Into Einstein's Structure. By the Editor and a
few contributors      141

VII.--Relativity: The Winning Essay in the Contest for the Eugene
Higgins $5,000 Prize. By Lyndon Bolton, British Patent Office,
London      169

VIII.--The New Concepts of Time and Space: The Essay in Behalf of
Which the Greatest Number of Dissenting Opinions Have Been Recorded. By
Montgomery Francis, New York      181

IX.--The Principle of Relativity: A Statement of What it is All
About, in Ideas of One Syllable. By Hugh Elliot, Chislehurst, Kent,
England      195

X.--Space, Time and Gravitation: An Outline of Einstein's Theory of
General Relativity. By W. de Sitter, University of Leyden      206

XI.--The Principle of General Relativity: How Einstein, to a Degree
Never Before Equalled, Isolates the External Reality from the
Observer's Contribution. By E. T. Bell, University of Seattle      218

XII.--Force Vs. Geometry: How Einstein Has Substituted the Second
for the First in Connection with the Cause of Gravitation. By Saul
Dushman, Schenectady      230

XIII.--An Introduction to Relativity: A Treatment in which the
Mathematical Connections of Einstein's Work are Brought Out More
Strongly and More Successfully than Usual in a Popular Explanation. By
Harold T. Davis, University of Wisconsin      240

XIV.--New Concepts for Old: What the World Looks Like After Einstein
Has Had His Way with It. By John G. McHardy, Commander R. N.,
London      251

XV.--The New World: A Universe in Which Geometry Takes the Place of
Physics, and Curvature that of Force. By George Frederick Hemens,
M.C., B.Sc., London      265

XVI.--The Quest of the Absolute: Modern Developments in Theoretical
Physics, and the Climax Supplied by Einstein. By Dr. Francis
D. Murnaghan, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore      276

XVII.--The Physical Side of Relativity: The Immediate Contacts between
Einstein's Theories and Current Physics and Astronomy. By Professor
William H. Pickering, Harvard College Observatory, Mandeville,
Jamaica      287

XVIII.--The Practical Significance of Relativity: The Best Discussion
of the Special Theory Among All the Competing Essays. By Prof. Henry
Norris Russell, Princeton University      306

XIX.--Einstein's Theory of Relativity: A Simple Explanation of His
Postulates and Their Consequences. By T. Royds, Kodaikanal Observatory,
India      318

XX.--Einstein's Theory of Gravitation: The Discussion of the
General Theory and Its Most Important Application, from the Essay by
Prof. W. F. G. Swann, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis      327

XXI.--The Equivalence Hypothesis: The Discussion of This, With Its
Difficulties and the Manner in Which Einstein Has Resolved Them, from
the Essay by Prof. E. N. da C. Andrade, Ordnance College, Woolwich,
England      334

XXII.--The General Theory: Fragments of Particular Merit on This
Phase of the Subject. By Various Contributors      338









I.

THE EINSTEIN $5,000 PRIZE

HOW THE CONTEST CAME TO BE HELD, AND SOME OF THE DETAILS OF ITS CONDUCT

BY THE EDITOR


In January, 1909, an anonymous donor who was interested in the spread
of correct scientific ideas offered through the Scientific American a
prize of $500 for the best essay explaining, in simple non-technical
language, that paradise of mathematicians and bugaboo of plain
ordinary folk--the fourth dimension. Many essays were submitted in
this competition, and in addition to that of the winner some twenty
were adjudged worthy of ultimate publication. It was felt that the
competition had added distinctly to the popular understanding of
this significant subject; that it had done much to clear up popular
misconception of just what the mathematician means when he talks
of four or even more dimensions; and that it had therefore been as
successful as it was unusual in character.

In November, 1919, the world was startled by the announcement from
London that examination of the photographs taken during the total
solar eclipse of May 29th had been concluded, and that predictions
based upon the Einstein theories of relativity had been verified. In
the reaction from the long surfeit of war news an item of this sort
was a thoroughly journalistic one. Long cable dispatches were carried
in the news columns all over the world; Einstein and his theories
were given a prominent place on the front pages day after day; leading
scientists in great number were called upon to tell the public through
the reportorial medium just what the excitement was all about, just
in what way the classical scientific structure had been overthrown.

Instead of being a mere nine days' wonder, the Einstein theories held
their place in the public mind. The more serious periodicals devoted
space to them. First and last, a very notable group of scientific men
attempted to explain to the general reader the scope and content of
Einstein's system. These efforts, well considered as they were, could
be no more than partially successful on account of the very radical
character of the revisions which the relativity doctrine demands in
our fundamental concepts. Such revisions cannot be made in a day;
the average person has not the viewpoint of the mathematician which
permits a sudden and complete exchange of one set of fundamentals
for another. But the whole subject had caught the popular attention
so strongly, that even complete initial failure to discover what it
was all about did not discourage the general reader from pursuing
the matter with determination to come to some understanding of what
had happened to Newton and Newtonian mechanics.




THE DONOR AND THE PRIZE

In May, 1920, Mr. Eugene Higgins, an American citizen long resident
in Paris, a liberal patron of the arts and sciences, and a lifelong
friend of the Scientific American and its proprietors, suggested that
the success of the Fourth Dimension Prize Contest of 1910 had been
so great that it might be desirable to offer another prize in similar
fashion for the best popular essay on the Einstein theories. He stated
that if in the opinion of the Scientific American these theories
were of sufficient importance, and the probability of getting a
good number of meritorious essays were sufficiently great, and the
public need and desire for enlightenment were sufficiently present,
he would feel inclined to offer such a prize, leaving the conduct
of the contest to the Scientific American as in the former event. It
was the judgment of the editors of the Scientific American that all
these provisos should be met with an affirmative, and that Mr. Higgins
accordingly could with propriety be encouraged to offer the prize.

In his preliminary letter Mr. Higgins had suggested that in view
of the apparent greater importance of the subject to be proposed
for discussion by the contestants of 1920, the prize offered should
probably be more liberal than in the former instance. This view met
with the approval of the editors as well; but they were totally
unprepared for the receipt, late in June, of a cablegram from
Mr. Higgins stating that he had decided to go ahead with the matter,
and that he was forwarding a draft for $5,000 to represent the amount
of the prize. Such a sum, exceeding any award open to a professional
man with the single exception of the Nobel Prize, for which he cannot
specifically compete, fairly took the breath of the Editors, and
made it immediately clear that the contest would attract the widest
attention, and that it should score the most conspicuous success. It
also made it clear that the handling of the contest would be a more
serious matter than had been anticipated.

In spite of the fact that it would not for some time be possible to
announce the identity of the Judges, it was felt that the prospective
contestants should have every opportunity for extensive preparation;
so the contest was announced, and the rules governing it printed
as far as they could be determined on such short shrift, in the
Scientific American for July 10, 1920. Several points of ambiguity
had to be cleared up after this initial publication. In particular,
it had been Mr. Higgins' suggestion that in the very probable event
of the Judges' inability to agree upon the winning essay, the prize
might, at their discretion, be divided between the contributors
of the best two essays. This condition was actually printed in the
first announcement, but the Post Office Department insisted upon its
withdrawal, on the ground that with it in force the contestant would
not know whether he were competing for $5,000 or for $2,500, and that
this would introduce the "element of chance" which alone was necessary,
under the Federal statutes, to make the contest a lottery. So this
provision was replaced by one to the effect that in the event the
Judges were not able to agree, the Einstein Editor should cast the
deciding vote between the essays respectively favored by them.

The announcement attracted the widest attention, and was copied in
newspapers and magazines all over the world. Inquiries poured in from
all quarters, and the Einstein Editor found it almost impossible to
keep himself supplied with proofs of the conditions and rules to mail
in response to these inquiries. It was immediately clear that there
was going to be a large number of essays submitted, and that many
distinguished names would be listed among the competitors.




THE JUDGES

In the Scientific American for September 18, announcement was carried
in the following words:

"We are assured with complete certainty that the competition for the
five-thousand-dollar prize will be very keen, and that many essays
will be submitted which, if they bore the names of their authors, would
pass anywhere as authoritative statements. The judges will confront a
task of extraordinary difficulty in the effort to determine which of
these efforts is the best; and we believe the difficulties are such
that multiplication of judges would merely multiply the obstacles to
an agreement. It is altogether likely that the initial impressions
of two or three or five judges would incline toward two or three
or five essays, and that any final decision would be attainable
only after much consultation and discussion. It seems to us that by
making the committee as small as possible while still preserving the
necessary feature that its decision represent a consensus, we shall
simplify both the mental and the physical problem of coming to an
agreement. We believe that the award should if possible represent
a unanimous decision, without any minority report, and that such a
requirement is far more likely to be met among two men than among
three or five. At the same time, the bringing together of two men and
the details of general administration of their work together are far
simpler than if there were three or five. So we have finally decided
to have but two judges, and in this we have the endorsement of all
the competent opinion that we have consulted.

"The gentlemen who have consented to act as Judges are Professors
Leigh Page and Edwin Plimpton Adams, of the departments of physics
of Yale and Princeton Universities, respectively. Both are of the
younger generation of physicists that has paid special attention to
those phases of mathematics and physics involved in the Einstein
theories, and both have paid special attention to these theories
themselves. We are gratified to be able to put forward as Judges
two men so eminently qualified to act. We feel that we may here
appropriately quote Professor Page, who says in his acceptance:
'As the large prize offers a great inducement, I had thought of
entering the contest. However I realize that not many people in
this country have made a considerable study of Einstein's theory,
and if all who have should enter the contest, it would be difficult
to secure suitable Judges.' Without any desire to put the gentleman
in the position of pleading for himself, we think this suggests very
well the extent to which the Scientific American, the contestants,
and the public at large, are indebted to Professors Page and Adams
for their willingness to serve in the difficult capacity of Judges."

It might appropriately have been added to this announcement that it
was altogether to the credit of science and the scientific spirit
that the first two gentlemen approached with the invitation to act
as Judges were willing to forego their prospects as contestants in
order thus to contribute to the success of the contest.




THREE THOUSAND WORDS

Of the conditions, the one which evoked most comment was that stating
the word limit. This limit was decided upon after the most careful
discussion of the possibilities of the situation. It was not imagined
for a moment that any contestant would succeed in getting within
3,000 words a complete discussion of all aspects of the Special
and the General Theories of Relativity. It was however felt that
for popular reading a single essay should not be much if any longer
than this. Moreover, I will say quite frankly that we should never
have encouraged Mr. Higgins to offer such a prize if we had supposed
that the winning essay was the only thing of value that would come
from the contest, or if we had not expected to find in many of the
other essays material which would be altogether deserving of the
light. From the beginning we had in view the present volume, and the
severe restriction in length was deliberately imposed for the purpose
of forcing every contestant to stick to what he considered the most
significant viewpoints, and to give his best skill to displaying the
theories of Einstein to the utmost advantage from these viewpoints. We
felt that divergent viewpoints would be more advantageously treated in
this manner than if we gave each contestant enough space to discuss
the subject from all sides; and that the award of the prize to the
essay which, among other requirements, seemed to the Judges to embody
the best choice of material, would greatly simplify the working of the
contest without effecting any injustice against those contestants who
displayed with equal skill less happily chosen material. Perhaps on
this point I may again quote with profit the editorial page of the
Scientific American:

"An essay of three thousand words is not long enough to lose a
reader more than once; if it does lose him it is a failure, and if
it doesn't it is a competitor that will go into the final elimination
trials for the prize. If we can present, as a result of the contest,
six or a dozen essays of this length that will not lose the lay reader
at all, we shall have produced something amply worth the expenditure
of Mr. Higgins' money and our time. For such a number of essays of
such character will of necessity present many different aspects of
the Einstein theories, and in many different ways, and in doing so
will contribute greatly to the popular enlightenment.

"Really the significant part of what has already appeared is
not the part that is intelligible, but rather the part that,
being unintelligible, casts the shadow of doubt and suspicion
on the whole. The successful competitor for the prize and
his close contestants will have written essays that, without
any claim to completeness, will emphasize what seems to each
author the big outstanding feature; and every one of them will be
intelligible. Together they will in all probability be reasonably
complete, and will retain the individual characteristic of
intelligibility. They will approach the various parts of the field
from various directions--we could fill this page with suggestions as
to how the one item of the four-dimensional character of Einstein's
time-space might be set forth for the general reader. And when a man
must say in three thousand words as much as he can of what eminent
scientists have said in whole volumes--well, the result in some cases
will be sheer failure, and in others a product of the first water. The
best of the essays will shine through intelligent selection of what
is to be said, and brilliant success in saying it. It is to get a
group of essays of this character, not to get the single essay which
will earn the palm, that the prize is offered."




THE COMPETING ESSAYS

At all times after the first announcement the Einstein Editor had a
heavy correspondence; but the first real evidence that the contest was
under way came with the arrival of the first essay, which wandered
into our office in the middle of September. About a week later they
began to filter in at the rate of one or two per day--mostly from
foreign contestants who were taking no chances on the mails. Heavy
returns did not commence until about ten days before the closing
date. The great avalanche, however, was reserved for the morning of
Monday, November 1st. Here we had the benefit of three days' mail;
there were about 120 essays. Among those which were thrown out on
the ground of lateness the honors should no doubt go to the man who
mailed his offering in The Hague on October 31st.

Essays were received in greater quantity from Germany than from any
other foreign country, doubtless because of the staggering value of
$5,000 when converted into marks at late 1920 rates. England stood
next on the list; and one or more essays were received from Austria,
Czechoslovakia, Jugoslavia, France, Switzerland, the Netherlands,
Denmark, Italy, Chile, Cuba, Mexico, India, Jamaica, South Africa
and the Fiji Islands. Canada, of course, contributed her fair share;
and few of our own states were missing on the roll-call.

The general level of English composition among the essays from
non-English-speaking sources was about what might have been expected. A
man may have a thorough utilitarian knowledge of a foreign tongue,
but when he attempts intensive literary competition with a man who was
brought up in that tongue he is at a disadvantage. We read French and
German with ease and Spanish and Italian without too much difficulty,
ourselves; we should never undertake serious writing in any of these
languages. Not many of the foreign contributions, of course, were
as ludicrous as the one we quote to some extent in our concluding
chapter, but most of them were distinctly below par as literary
compositions. Drs. De Sitter and Schlick were the notable exceptions
to this; both showed the ability to compete on a footing of absolute
equality with the best of the native product.

We dare say it was a foregone conclusion that many essays should have
been over the limit, and that a few should have been over it to the
point of absurdity. The winning essay contains 2,919 words, plus or
minus a reasonable allowance for error in counting; that it should
come so far from being on the ragged edge should be sufficient answer
to those who protested against the severity of the limitation. One
inquirer, by the way, wanted to know if 3,000 words was not a misprint
for 30,000. Another contestant suggested that instead of disqualifying
any essay that was over the line, we amputate the superfluous words
at the end. This was a plausible enough suggestion, since any essay
able to compete after such amputation must necessarily have been one
of extreme worth; but fortunately we did not have to decide whether we
should follow the scheme. Perhaps twenty of the essays submitted were
so seriously in excess of the limit that it was not even necessary
to count their words in detail; most of these offenders ran to 3,500
words or thereabouts, and one--a good one, too, from which we use
a good deal of material in this volume--actually had 4,700. On the
other extreme were a few competitors who seemed to think that the
shortest essay was necessarily the best, and who tried to dismiss
the subject with 500 or 1,000 words.

By a curious trick of chance there were submitted in competition
for the prize exactly 300 essays. Of course a few of these did not
require serious consideration--this is inevitable in a contest of such
magnitude. But after excluding all the essays that were admittedly
not about the Einstein theories at all, and all those whose English
was so execrable as to make them quite out of the question, and all
those which took the subject so lightly as not to write reasonably
close to the limit of 3,000 words, and all those which were given
over to explanation of the manner in which Einstein's theories verify
those of the writer, and all those in which the writer attempted
to substitute his own cosmic scheme for Einstein's--after all this,
there remained some 275 essays which were serious efforts to explain
in simple terms the nature and content and consequences of Special
and General Relativity.




LOOKING FOR THE WINNER

The Einstein Editor was in sufficiently close touch with the details
of the adjudication of the essays to have every realization of
the difficulty of this work. The caliber of the essays submitted
was on the whole high. There were many which would have been well
worthy of the prize in the absence of others that were distinctly
better--many which it was not possible to eliminate on the ground of
specific faults, and which could only be adjudged "not the best" by
detailed comparison with specific other essays. It was this detailed
comparison which took time, and which so delayed the award that we
were not able to publish the winning essay any sooner than February
5th. Especially difficult was this process of elimination after the
number of surviving essays had been reduced to twenty or less. The
advantages of plan possessed by one essay had to be weighed against
those of execution exhibited in another. A certain essay had to be
critically compared with another so like it in plan that the two might
have been written from a common outline, and at the same time with
a third as unlike it in scope and content as day and night. And all
the time there was present in the background the consciousness that
a prize of $5,000 hung upon the decision to be reached. For anyone
who regards this as an easy task we have no worse wish than that he
may some day have to attack a similar one.

We had anticipated that the bulk of the superior essays would be
among those received during the last day or two of the contest;
for we felt that the men best equipped to attack the subject would
be the most impressed with its seriousness. Here we were quite off
the track. The seventeen essays which withstood most stubbornly the
Judges' efforts at elimination were, in order of receipt, numbers 8,
18, 28, 40, 41, 43, 92, 95, 97, 130, 181, 194, 198, 223, 267, 270, 275:
a fairly even distribution. The winner was the 92nd essay received.

The Judges held their final meeting in the editorial office on
January 18, 1921. The four essays which were before the committee
at the start of the session were speedily cut to three, and then
to two; and after an all-day session the Judges found themselves
conscientiously able to agree on one of these as the best. This
unanimity was especially gratifying, the more so since it by no
means was to be confidently expected, on a priori grounds, that it
would be possible of attainment. Even the Einstein Editor, who might
have been called upon for a final decision but wasn't, can hardly be
classed as a dissenter; for with some slight mental reservations in
favor of the essay by Mr. Francis which did not enter the Judges'
final discussion at all, and which he rather suspects appeals more
to his personal taste than to his soundest judgment, he is entirely
in accord with the verdict rendered.

The fact that the prize went to England was no surprise to those
acquainted with the history of Einstein's theories. The Special Theory,
promulgated fifteen years ago, received its fair share of attention
from mathematicians all over the world, and is doubtless as well
known and as fully appreciated here as elsewhere. But it has never
been elevated to a position of any great importance in mathematical
theory, simply because of itself, in the absence of its extension
to the general case, it deserves little importance. It is merely an
interesting bit of abstract speculation.

The General Theory was put out by Einstein in finished form during
the war. Owing to the scientific moratorium, his paper, and hence a
clear understanding of the new methods and results and of the sweeping
consequences if the General Theory should prevail, did not attain
general circulation outside Germany until some time in 1918 or even
later. Had it not been for Eddington it is doubtful that the British
astronomers would have realized that the eclipse expeditions were of
particular consequence. Therefore at the time of these expeditions,
and even as late as the November announcement of the findings, the
general body of scientific men in America had not adequately realized
the immense distinction between the Special and the General Theories,
had not adequately appreciated that the latter led to distinctive
consequences of any import, and we fear in many cases had not even
realized explicitly that the deflection of light and the behavior of
Mercury were matters strictly of the General and in no sense of the
Special Theory. Certainly when the American newspapers were searching
frantically for somebody to interpret to their public the great stir
made by the British announcement that Einstein's predictions had
been verified, they found no one to do this decently; nor were our
magazines much more successful in spite of the greater time they had
to devote to the search. In a word, there is not the slightest room
for doubt that American science was in large measure caught asleep
at the switch--perhaps for no reason within its control; and that
American writers were in no such favorable case to write convincingly
on the subject as were their British and continental contemporaries.

So it was quite in accord with what might have been expected to find,
on opening the identifying envelopes, that not alone the winning essay,
but its two most immediate rivals, come from members of that school of
British thought which had been in contact with the Einstein theories
in their entirety for two years longer than the average American of
equal competence. This riper familiarity with the subject was bound
to yield riper fruit. Indeed, had it not been for the handicap of
writing in a strange language, it is reasonable to assume that the
scientists of Germany would have made a showing superior to that of
either Americans or British--and for the same reason that Britain
showed to better advantage than America.




THE WINNER OF THE PRIZE

Mr. Bolton, the winner of the big prize, we suppose may fairly be
referred to as unknown in a strict scientific sense. Indeed, at
the time of the publication of his essay in the Scientific American
nothing could be learned about him on the American side of the water
beyond the bare facts that he was not a young man, and that he had
for a good many years occupied a position of rank in the British
Patent Office. (It will be recalled that Einstein himself was in the
Swiss Patent Office for some time.) In response to the request of the
Scientific American for a brief biographical sketch that would serve
to introduce him better to our readers, Mr. Bolton supplied such a
concise and apparently such a characteristic statement that we can
do no better than quote it verbatim.

"I was born in Dublin in 1860, but I have lived in England since
1869. My family belonged to the landed gentry class, but I owe nothing
to wealth or position. I was in fact put through school and college
on an income which a workman would despise nowadays. After attending
sundry small schools, I entered Clifton College in 1873. My career
there was checkered, but it ended well. I was always fairly good at
natural science and very fond of all sorts of mechanical things. I
was an honest worker but no use at classics, and as I did practically
nothing else for the first four years at Clifton, I came to consider
myself something of a dunce. But a big public school is a little
world. Everyone gets an opportunity, often seemingly by accident,
and it is up to him to take it. Mine did not come till I was nearly
17. As I was intended for the engineering profession, I was sent to
the military side of the school in order to learn some mathematics,
at which subject I was then considered very weak. This was certainly
true, as at that time I barely knew how to solve a quadratic, I was
only about halfway through the third book of Euclid, and I knew no
trigonometry. But the teaching was inspiring, and I took readily
to mathematics. One day it came out that I had been making quite a
good start with the differential calculus on my own without telling
anybody. After that all was well. I left Clifton in 1880 with a School
Exhibition and a mathematical scholarship at Clare College, Cambridge.

"After taking my degree in 1883 as a Wrangler, I taught science and
mathematics at Wellington College, but I was attracted by what I had
heard of the Patent Office and I entered it through open competition in
1885. During my official career I have been one of the Comptroller's
private secretaries and I am now a Senior Examiner. During the
war I was attached to the Inventions Department of the Ministry of
Munitions, where my work related mainly to anti-aircraft gunnery. I
have contributed, and am still contributing to official publications
on the subject.

"I have written a fair number of essays on various subjects, even
on literature, but my only extra-official publications relate to
stereoscopic photography. I read a paper on this subject before the
Royal Photographic Society in 1903 which was favorably noticed by
Dr. von Rohr of Messrs. Zeiss of Jena. I have also written in the
Amateur Photographer.

"I have been fairly successful at athletics, and I am a member of
the Leander Club."

That Mr. Bolton did not take the prize through default of serious
competition should be plain to any reader who examines the text from
competing essays which is to be found in this volume. The reference
list of these competitors, too, supplemented by the names that appear
at the heads of complete essays, shows a notable array of distinguished
personalities, and I could mention perhaps a dozen more very well
known men of science whose excellent essays have seemed a trifle too
advanced for our immediate use, but to whom I am under a good deal
of obligation for some of the ideas which I have attempted to clothe
in my own language.

Before leaving the subject, we wish to say here a word of appreciation
for the manner in which the Judges have discharged their duties. The
reader will have difficulty in realizing what it means to read such
a number of essays on such a subject. We were fortunate beyond all
expectation in finding Judges who combined a thorough scientific
grasp of the mathematical and physical and philosophical aspects
of the matter with an extremely human viewpoint which precluded any
possibility of an award to an essay that was not properly a popular
discussion, and with a willingness to go to meet each other's opinions
that is rare, even among those with less ground for confidence in
their own views than is possessed by Drs. Page and Adams.

